# Creating a Smart Search plug-in

Smart Search plug-ins
are gathered together for convenience into a plug-in group called
"finder". Take a look in the `plugins/finder` directory and you will see
the plug-ins that support the core Joomla content types. It is best to
create your own plug-in by taking a copy of one of these plug-ins and
adapting it to meet your specific needs.

All Smart Search plug-ins extend the FinderIndexerAdapter class which
contains a good many methods to deal with maintaining the index. For the
vast majority of custom content requirements you will only need to
override a few of these methods.

There is some additional information on writing a Smart Search plug-in
[here](https://magazine.joomla.org/issues/issue-feb-2012/item/671-Developing-a-Smart-Search-Plugin).

## The principal properties

Before looking at the methods, there are a few properties that need to
be set up correctly:

  - $context
      -   
        This should be a unique identifier for the plug-in and
        establishes the context that the plug-in will respond to (eg.
        "Content").
  - $extension
      -   
        The name of the extension (component) that handles the content
        type (eg. "com\_content").
  - $layout
      -   
        The sublayout to use when rendering search results. For example,
        of $layout is set to "article" then the default view will look
        for a layout file called `default_article.php` when it needs to
        render a search result of this type. If no such file is found
        then the layout file called `default_result.php` will be used
        instead.
  - $table
      -   
        The name of the table to retrieve data from (eg.
        "\#\_\_content").
  - $state\_field
      -   
        The database field in your table that the published state of an
        item is stored in; default's to "state".

## The principal methods

The first methods you will want to override when developing a new Smart
Search plug-in are the setup, index and getListQuery methods. In the
vast majority of cases those three methods will be enough to get your
content indexed, although the plug-in will not be complete as there are
other methods that must be implemented to deal with issues such as
updating the index when the content changes. But those three methods are
the working core of the plug-in.

  - setup
      -   
        This method is called by the indexer once before an indexing run
        begins. It can be used to load libraries or initialise variables
        for the plug-in. Must return true.
  - index
      -   
        This is the main method called by the indexer. It is called once
        for each content item that is to be indexed (or the index
        updated). The index method essentially describes the content to
        the indexer by telling the indexer which fields to parse for
        terms/phrases and their relative weights, which fields to map
        into branches of the content map and what data to include in the
        index as "payload". This method is described in more detail
        later.
  - getListQuery
      -   
        This method must return a JDatabaseQuery object that will form
        the basis of a query that will return a list of objects of the
        given content type. There are constraints on this query to
        ensure that it is compatible with other methods used by the
        indexer. This method is described in more detail later.

## Some other methods

For a complete Smart Search plug-in there are a number of other methods
you may need to override.

  - translateState
      -   
        Given a content item this method translates the native state of
        the content item into a state that the indexer can use. It must
        return an integer 0 if the content item is not to appear in
        search results, or an integer 1 if the content item can appear
        in search results.
  - getURL
      -   
        Returns the non-SEF URL for an item. The default return, using
        plg\_finder\_content for example, is
        'index.php?option=com\_content\&view=article\&id=1'.
  - getStateQuery
      -   
        This method is used to build a generic query for checking the
        access and state of items and their parent categories. This
        method uses the $table and $state\_field properties to select
        the correct data.

## Event methods

The following methods are called via the Smart Search content plug-in in
response to specific trigger events in Joomla.

  - onFinderBeforeSave
      -   
        Called in response to an onContentBeforeSave event.
  - onFinderAfterSave
      -   
        Called in response to an onContentAfterSave event.
  - onFinderAfterDelete
      -   
        Called in response to an onContentDelete event.
  - onFinderChangeState
      -   
        Called in response to an onContentChangeState event.
  - onFinderCategoryChangeState
      -   
        Called in response to an onCategoryChangeState event.

## Methods in more details

### getListQuery

This method must return a JDatabaseQuery object that will form the basis
of a query that will return a list of objects of the given content type.
There are constraints on this query to ensure that it is compatible with
other methods used by the indexer. If the following conditions are not
true then you will need to override other methods in the
FinderIndexerAdapter class.

  - The primary database table that is being indexed must have an alias
    of "a".\[1\]

### index

This method is called whenever a content item needs to be indexed (or
re-indexed). It is passed an object of type FinderIndexerResult and its
purpose is to make adjustments to that object and to add metadata before
handing control to FinderIndexer::index method to do the indexing
proper.

### setup

This method is called prior to the index method and is used to set up
the index process. In this method is where you would typically include
any externally required classes to allow for proper indexing.

## FinderIndexerResult properties

  - url
  - route
  - title
  - description
  - published
  - state
  - access
  - language
  - publish\_start\_date
  - publish\_end\_date
  - extension (only used in core for com\_categories plugin)

## Testing

Testing a finder plugin can be a bit difficult due to the fact that it
is typically run using an ajax process, so you don't tend to actually
see any results from the process.

As such, one way to test is to use the command line indexer.\[2\]

Open a command prompt/ssh session on the server and go to the root
directory of the website. From there, you can run the indexer and errors
and log messages will go to the screen. `php cli/finder_indexer.php`

## Notes

<references/>

[Category:Smart Search](Category:Smart_Search "wikilink")

[Category:Plugin Development](Category:Plugin_Development "wikilink")

1.  If this condition is not true you will also have to override the
    getItem, getUpdateQueryByTime and getUpdateQueryByIds methods
2.  [Setting up automatic Smart Search
    Indexing](http://docs.joomla.org/Setting_up_automatic_Smart_Search_indexing)
